Docs/update readme (#103)
manticoresoftware/manticoresearch-helm: README.MD

# Manticore Search Helm Chart

**Version:** 6.3.6.2

The Manticore Search Helm Chart is designed to deploy and manage Manticore Search in Kubernetes. It ensures high availability with out-of-the-box replication and improves read throughput through automatic load balancing.

---

## Features

### What This Helm Chart Does
- Deploys a StatefulSet with one or multiple Manticore Search pods (workers) to form a replication cluster.
- Rolls out a Deployment with one or multiple Manticore Search load balancer instances (configurable in `values.yaml`).
- Deploys essential Kubernetes services.
- Provides a Prometheus exporter for monitoring running Manticore Search instances.

> ### Capabilities

Reviewer: Let's add the new feature to the list - that you can read/write without the balancer using k8s built-in lb capabilities

- **Automatic Data Compaction:** [Index compaction](https://manual.manticoresearch.com/Securing_and_compacting_an_index/Compacting_an_index#Compacting-an-index) is handled automatically.

---

## Installation

### Installation from Helm Repository
```bash
helm repo add manticoresearch https://helm.manticoresearch.com
# Update values.yaml if needed
helm install manticore -n manticore --create-namespace manticoresearch/manticoresearch
```

### Installation from GitHub (Development Version)
```bash
git clone https://github.com/manticoresoftware/manticoresearch-helm
cd manticoresearch-helm/charts/manticoresearch/
# Update values.yaml if needed
helm install manticore -n manticore --create-namespace .
```
For a specific release version, use:
```bash
git checkout <release-tag>
```
or download an archive from [GitHub releases](https://github.com/manticoresoftware/manticoresearch-helm/releases).

---

## Quick Start Guide

1. **Export Namespace and Chart Name for Convenience**
   ```bash
   export NAMESPACE=manticore
   export CHART_NAME=helm
   ```

2. **Wait for All Pods to Start**
   ```bash
   kubectl --namespace $NAMESPACE get po
   ```

3. **Forward Ports**

>     If you need to expose an HTTP port, you should use **9308** instead of **9306**.

Reviewer: It makes sense to explain briefly what 9306 and 9308 are.

    - **Worker Ports:**
      ```bash
      kubectl --namespace $NAMESPACE port-forward service/${CHART_NAME}-manticoresearch-worker-svc 7306:9306
      ```
    - **Load Balancer Ports:**
      ```bash
      kubectl --namespace $NAMESPACE port-forward service/${CHART_NAME}-manticoresearch-balancer-svc 6306:9306
      ```
      

4. **Connect to the Worker**
    - **SQL:**
      ```bash
      mysql -h0 -P7306
      ```

>     - **HTTP:** HTTP is stateless, so no persistent connection setup is required.

Reviewer: May be too difficult to comprehend for an average user. It's better to say this simpler: "if you are going to use HTTP, skip this step" or smth.

5. **Create Your First Table**
    - **SQL:**
      ```sql
      CREATE TABLE idx(title text);
      ```
    - **HTTP:**
      ```bash

>       curl -X "POST" localhost:7308/sql -d "mode=raw&query=create table idx(title text)"

Reviewer: -X post is not needed if you use -d.
Also, it may be better to put mode=raw to the url leaving all after -d for a command or even better to use /cli since it doesn't require adding the mode parameter, like this:

```
curl 0:9038/cli -d "command here"
```

      ```

6. **Add the Table to the Cluster**
    - **SQL:**
      ```sql
      ALTER CLUSTER manticore_cluster ADD idx;
      ```
    - **HTTP:**
      ```bash
      curl -X "POST" localhost:7308/sql -d "mode=raw&query=alter cluster manticore_cluster add idx"
      ```

> 7. **Insert Data into the Table**

Reviewer: Provide an example for the alternative ways of reading and writing - using k8s LB

Author: We are already exposing and using the service as a Kubernetes LoadBalancer (k8s LB). For insert that's only one way

      INSERT INTO manticore_cluster:idx (title) VALUES ('dog is brown'), ('mouse is small');
      ```
    - **HTTP:**
      ```bash
      curl -X "POST" -H "Content-Type: application/x-ndjson" localhost:7308/bulk -d '
      {"insert": {"cluster":"manticore_cluster", "index" : "idx", "doc": { "title" : "dog is brown" } } }
      {"insert": {"cluster":"manticore_cluster", "index" : "idx", "doc": { "title" : "mouse is small" } } }'
      ```

8. **Search Through the Balancer**
    - **SQL:**
      ```bash
      mysql -h0 -P6306 -e "SELECT * FROM idx WHERE match('dog')"
      ```
    - **HTTP:**
      ```bash
      curl -X "POST" localhost:6308/search -d '{"index" : "idx", "query": { "match": { "_all": "dog" } } }'
      ```

9. **Scale the Cluster**
   ```bash
   kubectl scale statefulsets manticore-manticoresearch-worker -n manticore --replicas=5
   ```

---

## Q&A

### Where is the Data Stored?
Data is stored in PersistentVolumeClaims (PVCs). Each worker pod has its own volume. By default, the PVC size is 1Gi (configurable via `worker.volume.size`).

### How is High Availability Achieved?
- **Replication:** Synchronous master-master replication ensures data durability.

> - **Data Persistence:** Worker volumes retain data even if pods are deleted.

Reviewer: Add info about our advanced recovery logic

### What happens when a worker pod goes back up?
It reuses the data existing before it went down. Then it tries to join the cluster and if the data is fresh enough it will catch up by applying recent changes occurred in the cluster, otherwise it will do full sync like if it was a completely new worker. If it can't find the cluster at all it will try to join the oldest node or node 0 (see below about replication modes).

### How Do I Delete Data?
You can truncate or delete tables, manually clean volumes, or delete the entire namespace.

### What Happens When a New Worker Pod is Added?
- The new pod starts and runs a side process to check for active nodes.
- It joins the oldest node or the cluster's primary worker.
- The pod waits until it fully syncs before becoming operational.

### What happens if I uninstall the helm chart?
The volumes will still retain the data and if you install the chart again to the same namespace you'll be able to access it.

### What Is the Balancer and How Does It Work?

> The balancer in ManticoreSearch is a key component for managing high availability (HA) in a replication cluster. It ensures that read operations are distributed efficiently across available worker pods, while write operations bypass the balancer and are sent directly to the worker pods.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The balancer in Manticore Search is a key component for managing high availability (HA) in a replication cluster. It ensures that read operations are distributed efficiently across available worker pods, while write operations bypass the balancer and are sent directly to the worker pods.
```

> The balancer in ManticoreSearch is a key component for managing high availability (HA) in a replication cluster. It ensures that read operations are distributed efficiently across available worker pods, while write operations bypass the balancer and are sent directly to the worker pods.

Reviewer: Mention that the balancer is optional and the pros and cons.

#### Key Functions of the Balancer:
- **Read Operations:** The balancer intelligently routes read queries (`SELECT`) to the most appropriate workers based on their status and availability. This ensures load is distributed evenly across active workers, enhancing cluster efficiency and reliability.
- **Write Operations:** Writes (`INSERT`, `UPDATE`, etc.) should be manually sent directly to the worker pods, bypassing the balancer.

#### How the Balancer Works:
1. **Dynamic Synchronization:**
   - If `balancer.enabled` is set to `true` (default), the balancer checks the table configuration on the first active worker every 5 seconds (configurable via the `balancer.runInterval` parameter).

>    - If the configuration differs from its current state, the balancer reloads itself to align with the updated tables.

Reviewer: What exactly is aligned? It's not quite clear.

Author: It queries the k8s API to understand what workers are available. This is relevant if one of the workers has fallen off due to a rediness probe.

Reviewer: Let's improve this, so it's clear what "align" means.

>    - If the configuration differs from its current state, the balancer reloads itself to align with the updated tables.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   - If the configuration changes, the balancer reloads to align with the updated list of tables and available workers.
```

2. **Event-Driven Updates:**
   - When a worker starts or stops, it sends a signal to the balancer, prompting immediate synchronization without waiting for the interval.

3. **High Availability Strategy:**
   - The balancer achieves HA by using `index_ha_strategy: nodeads`, ensuring queries are routed only to healthy nodes.

4. **Replica Redundancy:**
   - To further improve HA for read operations, you can increase the number of balancer replicas by adjusting the `balancer.replicaCount` parameter in `values.yaml`.

#### Configuration Options:

> - **Custom Behavior:** You can customize the balancer’s behavior using its HA strategy (`index_ha_strategy`).

Reviewer: Give a link to the docs with more info about the strategies

Author: I completed it in a few lines below

- **Enhanced Performance:** Scaling the number of balancer replicas improves the cluster’s ability to handle read requests.

For more details, refer to the [Load Balancing documentation](https://manual.manticoresearch.com/dev/Creating_a_cluster/Remote_nodes/Load_balancing#Load-balancing).

### How Does Auto OPTIMIZE Work?

> To enable automatic index compaction, update `values.yaml` and set `optimize.enabled = true`. The `optimize.interval` parameter controls how often disk chunk merging attempts occur.

Reviewer: Why is it disabled by default? Is it correct?

Author: Yes, this functionality was developed before the introduction of auto-optimization in searchd. It performs similar actions, so we have decided to disable it by default.

Reviewer: The auto-optimize built in helm has some advantages.

The auto OPTIMIZE process follows this algorithm:
1. Only one compaction session (OPTIMIZE) is allowed at a time. It checks if the previous OPTIMIZE session has finished or never started.
2. If all conditions are met, it retrieves information about pods labeled as `component=worker + instance` and performs OPTIMIZE on each pod sequentially.
3. Selects the index that benefits the most from compaction.
4. Determines the number of CPU cores available to calculate the optimal chunk count to retain after compaction:
   - Uses pod’s CPU limits if set.
   - Defaults to host CPU cores if limits are not set.
5. Executes OPTIMIZE with `cutoff=<cpuCores * values.optimize.coefficient>`.

### How does replication work?
The replication script affects only worker pods. Each worker does the following every time it starts:
![Replication workflow](replication.jpg)

### What's the Difference Between the Replication Modes?

> The Manticore Search Helm chart supports two replication modes: **master-to-master** and **master-to-slave**. These modes determine how a worker pod behaves when it joins a cluster or reconnects after being disconnected.

Reviewer: Add info about the 3rd mode - without using the distributed tables at all.

Author: No, this section describes replication between workers, connection to nodes after a restart, etc. It does not involve accessing the balancer. Essentially, it explains which master node a new node will join after being created or restarted.

So IMHO mentions about Balancer (distributed tables) here is unnessesarry

#### How the Balancer Works:
1. **Dynamic Synchronization:**
   - If `balancer.enabled` is set to `true` (default), the balancer checks the table configuration on the first active worker every 5 seconds (configurable via the `balancer.runInterval` parameter).
   - If the configuration changes, the balancer reloads to align with the updated list of tables and available workers.

2. **Event-Driven Updates:**
   - When a worker starts or stops, it sends a signal to the balancer, prompting immediate synchronization without waiting for the interval.

3. **High Availability Strategy:**
   - The balancer achieves HA by using `index_ha_strategy: nodeads`, ensuring queries are routed only to healthy nodes.

4. **Replica Redundancy:**
   - To further improve HA for read operations, you can increase the number of balancer replicas by adjusting the `balancer.replicaCount` parameter in `values.yaml`.

#### Configuration Options:
- **Custom Behavior:** You can customize the balancer’s behavior using its HA strategy (`index_ha_strategy`).
- **Enhanced Performance:** Scaling the number of balancer replicas improves the cluster’s ability to handle read requests.

> For more details, refer to the [Load Balancing documentation](https://manual.manticoresearch.com/dev/Creating_a_cluster/Remote_nodes/Load_balancing#Load-balancing).

Reviewer: ```suggestion

  For more details, refer to the [Load Balancing documentation](https://manual.manticoresearch.com/dev/Creating_a_cluster/Remote_nodes/Load_balancing#Load-balancing).
```

---

## Features

### What This Helm Chart Does
- Deploys a StatefulSet with one or multiple Manticore Search pods (workers) to form a replication cluster.
- Rolls out a Deployment with one or multiple Manticore Search load balancer instances (configurable in `values.yaml`).
- Deploys essential Kubernetes services.
- Provides a Prometheus exporter for monitoring running Manticore Search instances.

### Capabilities
- **Cluster Replication:** Create a table on any worker pod, add it to the cluster, and it replicates to all other pods.
- **Scaling:** Scale the workers' StatefulSet up or down, automatically adding or removing replicas in the cluster.
- **Resilience:** Workers that recover from downtime automatically sync with the active workers in the cluster.
- **Load Balancing:** Search requests made to the balancer are routed to one of the workers.
- **Automatic Data Compaction:** [Index compaction](https://manual.manticoresearch.com/Securing_and_compacting_an_index/Compacting_an_index#Compacting-an-index) is handled automatically.

> - **Direct Read/Write Access:** Perform read and write operations directly on any worker pod using Kubernetes’ built-in load balancing capabilities, bypassing the need for the balancer.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Direct Read/Write Access:** Can perform reading and writing operations directly on any worker pod using Kubernetes' built-in load balancing capabilities, bypassing the need for the balancer provided by the helm chart.
```

#### Master-to-Master Replication Mode

In this mode, a worker pod connects to the oldest node in the cluster. Write queries are routed through the service and load-balanced across all workers, providing **high availability for writes**.

- **Advantages:** This mode is recommended for most use cases as it ensures that writes are distributed among all active nodes.
- **Potential Risk:** In scenarios involving a complete cluster shutdown and with `quorumRecovery` enabled, data loss can occur if writes are made to different workers during downtime. For example, if worker 0 stops but writes continue to worker 1, and then worker 1 stops while writes are directed to worker 2, restarting the cluster from worker 0 may result in the loss of the writes made to workers 1 and 2.

#### Master-to-Slave Replication Mode

In this mode, all writes are directed to worker 0. Other workers connect to worker 0 if they lose cluster information.

- **Advantages:** This mode guarantees data consistency since worker 0 always holds the most up-to-date data.
- **Limitations:** **Writes are not highly available.** If worker 0 goes down, no writes can be processed until it is restored

> Note: This mode is not available if the Manticore Load Balancer (LB) is disabled.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note: This mode is not available if the Manticore Load Balancer is disabled.
```

### What Is `quorumRecovery`?

`quorumRecovery` addresses scenarios where a cluster loses a majority of its nodes, leading to a loss of quorum and blocking writes.

- When `quorumRecovery: true` is set, Manticore automatically attempts to recover the quorum by reinitializing the cluster from the oldest worker or worker 0, depending on the replication mode.

#### Master to master quorum recovery
![Master to Master quorum recovery scheme](m2m_quorum.jpg)

#### Master to slave quorum recovery
![Master to slave quorum recovery scheme](m2s_quorum.jpg)

## Making Queries to the Cluster

> By default, read and write operations are separated to achieve additive high availability (HA) using the built-in ManticoreSearch [Load Balancing](https://manual.manticoresearch.com/dev/Creating_a_cluster/Remote_nodes/Load_balancing#Load-balancing).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By default, read and write operations are separated to achieve additive high availability (HA) using the built-in Manticore Search [Load Balancing](https://manual.manticoresearch.com/dev/Creating_a_cluster/Remote_nodes/Load_balancing#Load-balancing).
```

If this behavior is unnecessary or having separate entry points for reads and writes is inconvenient, you can disable it by setting `balancer.enabled` to `false` in `values.yaml`. In this case, a single entry point will handle all requests:
- MySQL protocol: `{your-chart-name}-manticoresearch-worker-svc.manticore.svc.cluster.local:9306`
- HTTP: `{your-chart-name}-manticoresearch-worker-svc.manticore.svc.cluster.local:9308`

> Below is an explanation of how to interact with the cluster when **ManticoreSearch Load Balancer (LB)** is enabled:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Below is an explanation of how to interact with the cluster when **Manticore Search Load Balancer** is enabled:
```
